Geology is the science which investigates the successive changes that
have taken place in the organic and inorganic kingdoms of nature; it
inquires into the causes of these changes, and the influence which they
have exerted in modifying the surface and external structure of our
planet.

By these researches into the state of the earth and its inhabitants at
former periods, we acquire a more perfect knowledge of its present
condition, and more comprehensive views concerning the laws now
governing its animate and inanimate productions. When we study history,
we obtain a more profound insight into human nature, by instituting a
comparison between the present and former states of society. We trace
the long series of events which have gradually led to the actual posture
of affairs; and by connecting effects with their causes, we are enabled
to classify and retain in the memory a multitude of complicated
relations--the various peculiarities of national character--the
different degrees of moral and intellectual refinement, and numerous
other circumstances, which, without historical associations, would be
uninteresting or imperfectly understood. As the present condition of
nations is the result of many antecedent changes, some extremely remote,
and others recent, some gradual, others sudden and violent; so the
state, of the natural world is the result of a long succession of
events; and if we would enlarge our experience of the present economy of
nature, we must investigate the effects of her operations in former
epochs.

We often discover with surprise, on looking back into the chronicles of
nations, how the fortune of some battle has influenced the fate of
millions of our contemporaries, when it has long been forgotten by the
mass of the population. With this remote event we may find inseparably
connected the geographical boundaries of a great state, the language now
spoken by the inhabitants, their peculiar manners, laws, and religious
opinions. But far more astonishing and unexpected are the connections
brought to light, when we carry back our researches into the history of
nature. The form of a coast, the configuration of the interior of a
country, the existence and extent of lakes, valleys, and mountains, can
often be traced to the former prevalence of earthquakes and volcanoes in
regions which have long been undisturbed. To these remote convulsions
the present fertility of some districts, the sterile character of
others, the elevation of land above the sea, the climate, and various
peculiarities, may be distinctly referred. On the other hand, many
distinguishing features of the surface may often be ascribed to the
operation, at a remote era, of slow and tranquil causes--to the gradual
deposition of sediment in a lake or in the ocean, or to the prolific
increase of testacea and corals.

To select another example, we find in certain localities subterranean
deposits of coal, consisting of vegetable matter, formerly drifted into
seas and lakes. These seas and lakes have since been filled up, the
lands whereon the forests grew have disappeared or changed their form,
the rivers and currents which floated the vegetable masses can no longer
be traced, and the plants belonged to species which for ages have passed
away from the surface of our planet. Yet the commercial prosperity, and
numerical strength of a nation, may now be mainly dependent on the local
distribution of fuel determined by that ancient state of things.

Geology is intimately related to almost all the physical sciences, as
history is to the moral. An historian should, if possible, be at once
profoundly acquainted with ethics, politics, jurisprudence, the military
art, theology; in a word, with all branches of knowledge by which any
insight into human affairs, or into the moral and intellectual nature of
man, can be obtained. It would be no less desirable that a geologist
should be well versed in chemistry, natural philosophy, mineralogy,
zoology, comparative anatomy, botany; in short, in every science
relating to organic and inorganic nature. With these accomplishments,
the historian and geologist would rarely fail to draw correct and
philosophical conclusions from the various monuments transmitted to them
of former occurrences. They would know to what combination of causes
analogous effects were referable, and they would often be enabled to
supply, by inference, information concerning many events unrecorded in
the defective archives of former ages. But as such extensive
acquisitions are scarcely within the reach of any individual, it is
necessary that men who have devoted their lives to different departments
should unite their efforts; and as the historian receives assistance
from the antiquary, and from those who have cultivated different
branches of moral and political science, so the geologist should avail
himself of the aid of many naturalists, and particularly of those who
have studied the fossil remains of lost species of animals and plants.

The analogy, however, of the monuments consulted in geology, and those
available in history, extends no farther than to one class of historical
monuments--those which may be said to be _undesignedly_ commemorative of
former events. The canoes, for example, and stone hatchets found in our
peat bogs, afford an insight into the rude arts and manners of the
earliest inhabitants of our island; the buried coin fixes the date of
the reign of some Roman emperor; the ancient encampment indicates the
districts once occupied by invading armies, and the former method of
constructing military defences; the Egyptian mummies throw light on the
art of embalming, the rites of sepulture, or the average stature of the
human race in ancient Egypt. This class of memorials yields to no other
in authenticity, but it constitutes a small part only of the resources
on which the historian relies, whereas in geology it forms the only kind
of evidence which is at our command. For this reason we must not expect
to obtain a full and connected account of any series of events beyond
the reach of history. But the testimony of geological monuments, if
frequently imperfect, possesses at least the advantage of being free
from all intentional misrepresentation. We may be deceived in the
inferences which we draw, in the same manner as we often mistake the
nature and import of phenomena observed in the daily course of nature;
but our liability to err is confined to the interpretation, and, if this
be correct, our information is certain.

It was long before the distinct nature and legitimate objects of geology
were fully recognized, and it was at first confounded with many other
branches of inquiry, just as the limits of history, poetry, and
mythology were ill-defined in the infancy of civilization. Even in
Werner's time, or at the close of the eighteenth century, geology
appears to have been regarded as little other than a subordinate
department of mineralogy; and Desmarest included it under the head of
Physical Geography. But the most common and serious source of confusion
arose from the notion, that it was the business of geology to discover
the mode in which the earth originated, or, as some imagined, to study
the effects of those cosmological causes which were employed by the
Author of Nature to bring this planet out of a nascent and chaotic state
into a more perfect and habitable condition. Hutton was the first who
endeavored to draw a strong line of demarcation between his favorite
science and cosmogony, for he declared that geology was in nowise
concerned "with questions as to the origin of things."

An attempt will be made in the sequel of this work to demonstrate that
geology differs as widely from cosmogony, as speculations concerning the
mode of the first creation of man differ from history. But, before
entering more at large on this controverted question, it will be
desirable to trace the progress of opinion on this topic, from the
earliest ages to the commencement of the present century.
